Whether you’re a seasoned investor or just starting out in the stock market, taxes on stock investments can get pretty tricky. 

But having a solid understanding of how stocks get taxed can help you make better informed investing decisions, and can also save you from giving up those precious returns to Uncle Sam.

In this video, I’ll break down the basics of how stocks are taxed and give some tips to help you pay less taxes on your stock investments.

Before diving in, I just want to clarify that I am by no means a tax professional. 

I’m just here to share useful information that I’ve learned overtime that has helped me on my investing journey. 

So take this with a grain of salt and consult a tax professional to better understand how you can apply the info in this video to your specific tax situation.

If you find this video helpful, don’t forget toss it a like, and subscribe to my channel for more videos like this one.

When you own a stock, there are two types of income you can get from that stock.

The first is through appreciation, also known as capital gains. 

If you decide to sell a stock you own for more than you paid for it, the profit you get is referred to as your capital gains. 

You only receive capital gains when you actually sell stock.

The second type of income you can get from stocks is dividends. 

When a company makes a profit, it can choose to distribute those profits to owners of the company’s stock as dividends.

And if you own stock in that company, then you would receive a share of that profit depending on how much stock you own. 

But you only receive dividends while you own the company’s stock. 

Each type of income you can get from stocks are subject to taxes, but the way they are taxed are a bit different from each other. 

Let’s see how capital gains are taxed.

There are two types of capital gains tax: short term and long term. 

The type you pay depends on how long you owned the stock you sold for. 

If you owned it for one year or less before selling, then the profits you make on that sale would be considered short-term capital gains. 

The tax rate you pay for short-term capital gains depends on your income, but is in line with your normal income tax rate.

If you owned the stock for longer than one year before selling, then the profits you make on that sale would be considered long-term capital gains. 

Depending on what your taxable income is, you will either owe 20%, 15%, or nothing at all on your long-term capital gains. 

Either way, long term capital gains taxes are always lower and more favorable than short-term capital gains taxes. 

If you hold a stock for over a year before selling, you’re going to pay a lower, better tax rate on your profits, compared to holding it for under a year before selling. 

So keep that in mind next time you’re considering selling stock.

Now let’s talk about dividend taxes.

The way dividends get taxed depend on the type of dividend it is, and there are two types.

Non-qualified dividends, also known as ordinary dividends, are just dividends that get taxed like ordinary income. 

Since these just get taxed at your normal tax rate, we won’t spend too much time here.

Qualified dividends get taxed at lower rates than non-qualified dividends, but need to meet two requirements.

First, the dividend needs to come from a US corporation or a qualified foreign corporation.

Second, you need to have held the stock for more than 60 days during the 121-day period that began 60 days before the stock’s ex-dividend date.

And in case you’re wondering, the ex-dividend date is the date you need to own a company’s stock before in order to have rights to its next dividend payout. 

So if you buy a stock on or after its ex-dividend date, you are not entitled to a dividend for that period.

The tax rate you pay on qualified dividends depends on your income, but can be either 0%, 15%, or 20%, just like long-term capital gains tax.

So you’d definitely rather be paying these rates than normal tax rates.

Now that we’ve gone over the basics of stock taxation, let’s go through five tips that can help you keep your taxes to a minimum.

The first tip is to invest for the long term, which I alluded to earlier.

When you hold stocks long-term, you get to reap the benefits of long-term capital gains rates when you sell, which as we know are better than ordinary income tax rates.

The second tip is to pick your cost basis when you sell stock.

If you own multiple shares of a stock, and you want to sell some but not all of them, a lot of brokerage accounts will just choose which shares to sell randomly. 

But a good brokerage account will give you the option to choose what specific shares you want to sell, and you can use this to your advantage.

Selling the shares you bought at the highest prices lets you report the higher prices you bought the stock at come tax time. This means that the capital gains you would report would be lower on paper. 

And this can substantially reduce how much you owe in capital gains taxes, and even possibly eliminate them altogether if you sell at a loss.

And that leads me to my third tip, which is to use capital losses to your advantage.

If you sell stock at a loss, then the losses you take on that sale are considered capital losses, just like how selling stocks at a gain gets you capital gains.

And while selling stock at a loss isn’t usually the best situation to be in, it does have some nice tax benefits.

Not only can you offset the capital gains you made in a year with capital losses, 

but if your capital losses exceed your capital gains, then you can deduct that net capital loss from your taxable income, up to $3,000.

And on top of that, if that net capital loss goes over the $3,000 threshold, then you can carry the remainder forward to offset capital gains in future tax years!

For example, lets say I have an annual income of $80,000, and this year I made $1,000 in capital gains but $5,000 in capital losses.

My capital losses offset my capital gains, and I can use the remaining $4,000 to deduct from my taxable income. 

And since I can only use $3,000 of it this year, the extra $1,000 I can carry over to use in next years taxes!

My next tip is to use tax-advantaged accounts when investing.

Some tax-advantaged accounts, like HSAs and Roth IRAs, let you buy and sell stocks without paying capital gains taxes.

Other tax-advantaged accounts, like traditional IRAs and 401(k)s, let you deduct the contributions you make to them from your taxable income.

Either way, using tax-advantaged accounts can help you keep much more of your returns during your investing journey.

I talk a lot more about this in my other video that goes over the optimal order to invest.

So if you’re interested in learning more about what accounts can help you save on taxes and when you should be using them to maximize your returns, definitely check out that video!

My last tip is to consider donating stock to your favorite charity. 

On top of supporting a cause you love, donating stock to charity can actually benefit you tax-wise.

When you donate shares of stock to a charity, you won’t owe any capital gains tax on that stock. 

On top of that, you get a tax deduction for the shares you donated. 

And to make this sweeter, the deduction is based on the value of the shares when you donated them, not when you bought them.

But keep in mind that as of the time of this recording, you can only deduct up to 30% of your adjusted gross income for stock donations each year.

So while taxes can be complicated, by now you should have a much better understanding of how stocks are taxed, and what you can do to minimize what you owe.

If you have any more tips on reducing taxes on stock investments, spread the wealth and toss them in the comments!

And with that, thanks so much for watching! if you enjoyed this video, don’t forget to smash that like button, and smash that subscribe button to see more videos like this one!